<!-- SPDX-License-Identifier: AGPL-3.0-only -->
<!-- SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2020 The LumoSQL Authors, 2019 Oracle -->
<!-- SPDX-ArtifactOfProjectName: LumoSQL -->
<!-- SPDX-FileType: Documentation -->
<!-- SPDX-FileComment: Original by Dan Shearer, 2020 -->


Table of Contents
=================

   * [Building and Installing LumoSQL](#building-and-installing-lumosql)
      * [Directory layout](#directory-layout)
      * [Linux/Unix](#linuxunix)
         * [Build environment](#build-environment)
         * [Using the Makefile tool](#using-the-makefile-tool)
   * [Running LumoSQL](#running-lumosql)
      * [Windows](#windows)
      * [Android](#android)

   * [References](#references)



# Building and Installing LumoSQL

## Directory layout

In order to build LumoSQL and SQLite and to used different versions of the backends,
we use the following directory layout:

... FIXME update for a not-forking world...

[Build and test LumoSQL](./3.5-lumo-test-build.md)

## Linux/Unix


### Build environment

On Ubuntu 18.0.4 LTS, Debian Stable (buster), and on any reasonably recent
Debian or Ubuntu-derived distribution, you need only:

```sh
sudo apt install git build-essential tcl
sudo apt build-dep sqlite3
```

> (`apt build-dep` requires `deb-src` lines uncommented in /etc/apt/sources.list and `sudo apt update` after that)

On Fedora 30, and on any reasonably recent Fedora-derived distribution:

```sh
sudo dnf install --assumeyes \
  git make gcc ncurses-devel readline-devel glibc-devel autoconf tcl-devel
```

The maintainers are test building LumoSQL on Debian, Fedora, Gentoo and Ubuntu.
Container images with the dependencies installed are available at
<https://quay.io/repository/keith_maxwell/lumosql-build> and the build steps are
in <https://github.com/maxwell-k/containers>.

### Using the Makefile tool

*FIXME for a post-not-forking world*

# Running LumoSQL

libraries and a command line shell are built with the following names:

    ```lumosql```

    This is the command line shell. It operates identically to the SQLite sqlite3 shell.

    ```liblumosql```

    This is the library that provides the LumoSQL SQL interface. It is the equivalent of the SQLite libsqlite3 library.

## Windows

LumoSQL is not supported on Windows as yet. Want to help?

## Android

LumoSQL is not supported on Android as yet.  Want to help?

# References

- The [Fedora Spec file for "sqlite3"](https://apps.fedoraproject.org/packages/sqlite/sources/)
  lists dependencies.
- The [documentation](https://sqlite.org/whynotgit.html#getthecode) linking to
  the [official SQLite GitHub mirror](https://github.com/sqlite/sqlite)

