<!-- SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0 -->
<!-- SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2020 The LumoSQL Authors -->
<!-- SPDX-ArtifactOfProjectName: LumoSQL -->
<!-- SPDX-FileType: Documentation -->
<!-- SPDX-FileComment: Original by Dan Shearer, 2020 -->

# How Does LumoSQL Work

Welcome to the LumoSQL project, which builds on the excellent
[SQLite](https://sqlite.org/) project without forking it.  LumoSQL is an SQL database
which can be used in embedded applications identically to SQLite, but also
optionally with different storage backends and other additional behaviour.
LumoSQL emphasises benchmarking, code reuse and modern database implementation.


SQLite code has been incorporated into many other projects, they are listed in the [relevant knowledgebase](./2.4-relevant-knowledgebase.md#list-of-sqlite-code-related-knowledge) section.


About LumoSQL
=============

LumoSQL is a combination of two embedded data storage C language libraries:
[SQLite](https://sqlite.org) and [LMDB](https://github.com/LMDB/lmdb). LumoSQL
is an updated version of Howard Chu's 2013
[proof of concept](https://github.com/LMDB/sqlightning) combining the codebases.
Howard's LMDB library has become an ubiquitous replacement for
[bdb](https://sleepycat.com/) on the basis of performance, reliability, and
license so the 2013 claims of it greatly increasing the performance of SQLite
seemed credible. D Richard Hipp's SQLite is used in thousands of software
projects, and since three of them are Google's Android, Mozilla's Firefox and
Apple's iOS, an improved version of SQLite will benefit billions of people.

About the LumoSQL Project
=========================

LumoSQL was started in December 2019 by Dan Shearer, who did the original source
tree archaeology, patching and test builds. Keith Maxwell joined shortly after
and contributed version management to the Makefile and the benchmarking tools.

A main goal of the LumoSQL Project is to create and maintain an improved version of
SQLite without forking it, although there are other goals as well.

LumoSQL is supported by the [NLNet Foundation](https://nlnet.nl).

If you are interested in contributing to LumoSQL please see [contributions](./3.1-contributions.md).



LumoSQL Interfaces Are Almost the Same as SQLite
================================================

Your interaction with the LumoSQL interface (commandline, PRAGMAs and API) is
almost identical to SQLite. You use the same APIs, the same command shell
environment, the same SQL statements, and the same PRAGMAs to work with the
database created by LumoSQL as you would if you were using SQLite.

To learn how to use SQLite, see the [SQLite Documentation](https://sqlite.org/docs.html).

That said, there are a few small differences between the two interfaces.
 
# Features

Below you can find discussion on each of the features that LumoSQL implements together with some reasoning behind their implemenrtation.

* [API](./api.md)
* [BDB Backend](./backends.md)
* [Virtual Machine Layer](./virtual-machine.md)
* [Rollback Journal as an Alternative to WALs](./WALs.md)
* [Online Database Servers](./online-database-servers.md)
* [Corruption Detection](./lumo-corruption-detection-and-magic.md)
* [Savepoints](./what-are-savepoints.md)
* [Benchmarking](./3.3-benchmarking.md/#benchmarking-lumosql)
* [Not-Forking](./3.4-not-forking-tool.md#not-forking-upstream-source-code-tracker)
* [Build LumoSQL](./3.5-lumo-test-build)

